Right. Good morning everyone. Welcome
back. This is lecture A7 uh of statist
thinking 2026. I want to pick up where
we left off in the previous lecture. I'm
introducing
uh elements of do calculus to you. So
you can see one of the formal frameworks
for doing causal inference for taking
combinations of generative models and uh
questions about those models and
designing statistical models which
satisfy uh the estimate. U remind you
what we're going to achieve though or
rather not to remind you but to to give
you some anticipation about what I want
to achieve in this lecture. I have a
couple of top level goals or messages to
get across to you. Um, but it's also it
these are going to be sound like
negative messages. Uh, I guarantee you
there will be lots of positive
constructive things in the lecture like
I'm teaching you methodology to design
statistical models. Um, but part of the
education of this is unlearning things
you might have not so much been taught
but absorbed from the scientific
literature which is full of nonsense.
I'm sorry to say, but journals are just
full of illogical statistical
procedures. And of course, scientists
read those because they got published.
Someone peer- reviewviewed this, right?
And so you copy it. It's a perfectly
natural thing to do. My job as a
statistician is to educate you to use a
more um uh legitimate form of
decision-making about your statistical
procedures.
Uh
uh the first thing get across is this
message about good and bad controls
which is the title of this lecture. Um
very the main question that most of us
get in applied statistics is scientists
want to know which variables to add to
their regression. Yeah, it's just like
number one thing people come to my
office like got this problem. Which
variables should I add? And I'm like
whoa back up. We got a lot more to talk
about before we get there. Right? like
would you like to take a 10-week course
for example? Like that's like the second
thing I say. I'm very helpful. No. Um uh
a couple things I want to say about this
though. It's it's reasonable for this to
be the question. I understand why this
is what people ask for. Um and there are
a bunch of of uh huristics out there for
doing this. And it's not that they never
work, but they're they're risky in
various ways. And we want to go beyond
that. Um remember in science it's not
enough just to be right. You need to be
able to justify the answer as being
right. Yeah, it's different than the
real world. In the real world, like a
squirrel doesn't care about justifying
its foraging behavior. It just needs to
find food. But scientists have this
extra thing. It's we have to find the
food and justify how we found it.
[laughter] Is that the metaphor broke
down there, but you understand what I
mean, right? Um, and knowledge is
justified true belief. At least that's
one definition of it. And so, it's not
enough for us to be right. We have to be
able to justify it. our colleagues have
to trust it as being right because it's
not verifiable as right. Does that make
sense? A lot of scientific claims are
not immediately verifiable just from
their description. Um so the kind of
dangerous heristics include things like
try anything in the spreadsheet. YOLO.
Remember YOLO? You only live once. Yeah,
it's kind of an old meme now, but um uh
lots of people do this, right?
everything that's been measured, put it
in there. Um, filter it by p values,
whatever kind of heruristic it is. Lots
of scientists will do that sort of
stuff. Um, other people will prefilter
the variables um to remove things that
have high um bari correlations. This is
things that are highly colinear. This is
never a legitimate procedure regardless
of what you might have been taught. Uh
it's colinearity is not an inferial
problem. Okay? It's a measurement
problem and it's too late to solve it
after you've measured the variables.
Right? Uh I'm going to the framework I'm
introducing in starting in the previous
lectures but really building on we'll
pick up steam today will try to convince
you why colinearity arises for a diverse
range of causal reasons and only some of
them mess up your inference. It's
perfectly fine to put highly colinear
predictors in the same model under
certain circumstances.
Um, and then a heristic that I I
actually don't think is that bad, but
it's still risky, and I want to explain
why, is the idea that you can put any
pre-treatment measurement or baseline
measurement in your model. This is not
always true. Uh, and this brings the
thing that there are good controls,
things that you can add to your
regression that'll help you get a a
valid causal inference. And there are
also bad controls, things you can add to
your model that will create bias. And I
think it's it's a betrayal of the
student scientist that you were not
taught that in your first stats class,
right? I think controls are presented
like, well, you can't do any harm if you
measured something. Just add it to the
regression model, right? [snorts] That's
kind of the vibe you've been given. It's
wrong. Uh and I am here to reveal that
betrayal to you uh in the full light of
day and and help you move past it. Uh
it's okay if you feel betrayed. We all
did. Uh I felt betrayed when I first
learned this, too. Um it's just how it
goes. Okay. The other thing is as a
practical matter is this thing called
the table two fallacy. Basically this is
great paper uh I consider it a classic
in applied statistics by Westerrike and
Greenland from 2013. It's a great paper
it's very readable. uh uh the key issue
and I'm going to unpack this later in
the lecture is that when we design even
perfectly correctly a regression model
to answer a particular causal estimates
that come out of that model don't all
mean the same thing. They're not all
causal estimates and in particular the
coefficients on control variables things
you've added in order to construct a
causal estimate are uninterpretable
usually as causal estimates. Now think
about why this is bad because usually
what happens is there's a table in a
scientific paper. Usually it's table
two. Yeah. Um and that's why it's called
the table two fallacy. And all the
regression coefficients are there and
then the paper begins telling stories
about every one of them as if it was a
total causal effect of that variable.
This is facious under any statistical
framework. Uh but it's very widespread.
So I want to get a the point of the
material I'm trying to teach you is to
help you understand why that's facious
and to make the correct interpretations
of the coefficients in the models you
design. And some of them will be causal
effects if you're lucky. And some of
them you will know are never causal
effects but they still need to be in the
model even though they're themselves
confounded. Yeah. Just because you've
deconfounded the treatment of interest
doesn't mean you deconfounded everything
else in the model. Okay. I want to show
I'll show you examples of this. Does
that make some sense? Yeah. This is not
meant to be a terrifying thing. It's
meant to be liberation, right? There's
mix of expressions uh in the audience.
Okay, we're going to come back to the
four elemental compounds. I had only
managed to explain the fork to you last
time. Um we're going to work through all
of these um uh in in quick order. The
goal of which is to teach you the basic
rules of what's called deparation or
directional separation. And what that's
going to enable you to do is to block
non-causal paths by adding good controls
to your model and to not create biases
by adding bad controls. And luckily,
there are only these four rules. That's
it. That's all of desparation. It's
super simple. No matter how big the DAG
gets, it's just these three. Uh it's a
nice sometimes the universe is benign,
right? I mean, space is a cold vacuum
hostile to human life, but here on
Earth, we have desparation, right? It's
nice.
um our warm extremely thin low molar
blanket of of atmosphere. I should stop
talking, right? Okay. [laughter]
Um so let's move past the fork to the
pipe. Uh the pipe is very much like the
fork except now the arrows go in the
same way. Remember in the fork you have
Z is a common cause of X and Y. Here Z
is a mediator. That's at least in some
sub fields that's what people call it.
Is this language familiar to some of
you? I think I think psychologists are
taught about mediation. Yeah. Very us
very commonly. uh some some sub fields
of biology are as well. Um you could
also call it an intermediate cause. Uh
so uh in in this situation uh X and Y
are associated in the data set. They're
they're not independent. That's what the
mathematical notation on the right there
means. The that funny upside down pi
thing with the slash through it means
not independent. There's they're they
share information. This is
informationational independence. We're
talking about association. Um the
influence of X on Y is transmitted
entirely through Z. And as a consequence
of that, when we condition on Z or
stratify by Z, um X and Y are
independent. So again, there's this
weird math notation in the lower right
of this slide. That means Y is
independent of X conditional on Z. Or
you could say once you know Z, there's
nothing else X can tell you about Y
because everything that Y knows about X
was passed by Z. I'll say that again.
Once you know Z, there's nothing X can
tell you about Y because everything
everything that Y knows about X was
passed on by Z. It's like once you've
interviewed Z, there's nothing else X
can tell you. Yeah, it's like if it was
a detective situation.
Did that help? I don't know. I just make
up metaphors and hopefully they work for
some of you. Um
the uh the pipe is really interesting in
for a number of reasons. Uh first of all
because it's present quite often in in
real causal models, but also because it
has a lot of the same properties as the
fork. Um and this is going to be very
important for us. Uh so here's just a
quick um simulation experiment. I
encourage you to do these kinds of
experiments because they help you debug
your thinking and let you poke at the
concepts and find out exactly where you
may have misunderstood something. You
can vary the size of the effects and the
strengths of the associations and play
around with this code on your own. I'm
just simulating the pipe. Uh uh we have
binary or bernoli variable x. Uh then it
it generates z values that are uh
strongly associated with it. And then
those Z values generate Y. You see that
in the code. Um and then we just look at
the contingency tables. You see that um
X and Y are associated in counts, right?
Values when X is zero, Y tends to be
zero. And they have a strong correlation
about 64 in this example. So Y is not
independent of X. They share
information. If I tell you X, you can
make better guesses about Y. If I tell
you Y, you can make better guesses about
X. That means they're associated. Yeah.
Um,
if we stratify by Z though, that is no
longer true. Within levels of Z, X and Y
are not associated. There are more zeros
when Z is zero. Yes, but X and Y are not
associated as long as Z is zero. And
again, why? Because everything that the
variable Y knows about X was passed on
by Z. So once we've brought ourselves
down to a single value of Z, we've
already learned everything about X that
was relevant. Yeah. And there's no
longer an association. Same for Z equals
1. Is this cool? Yeah. I think this
stuff is still cool. But this is just
information theory at this point. Um but
it's it's how it works. Remember the
same was true of the fork.
Yeah, there was a there was a variable
in the middle called Z and when we
stratified by it, X and Y were no longer
associated. But the causal relationships
are different. That means we do end up
treating them differently in structural
causal models. Um the this graph also
looks the same. Uh I take a simulation
now where I make X and Y continuous and
they have different um means for the
different values of Z. Uh so in the
total data set that's the black line
here. We just take all the blue points
where Z equals 0 and all the red points
for Z equals 1 and we make them a single
data set. We run a regression line
through it. Definitely there's an
association between X and Y because in
the total sample they're associated,
right? their association is passing
through Z. We're not conditioning on Z
in the total data set. When we stratify
by Z, we've got two subopuls. Now, in
each of those, the red and the blue,
there's no association between X and Y.
Yeah. Make sense? Um, and again, this
looks exactly like the fork. Yeah. Which
is to remind you of something you know,
but uh is that in the data alone, you
can't tell the difference between a fork
and a pipe. you have to make assumptions
or use other data to determine the
direction of these things. That was the
question.
>> But it also looks a little bit like
Simpson paradox.
>> Yeah. The question was it looks a little
bit like Simpsons paradox. Simpsons
paradox I have a whole lecture about
Simpsons paradox and I don't know if I
can fit it into this course. Yes. Uh
this is one way the Simpsons paradox
arises. The Simpsons paradox is causally
diverse. There are lots of different
causal structures that'll produce that
coefficient reversal that people call
Simpsons paradox. But you're exactly
right. But I have a bunch of slides
about Simpsons paradox. Uh maybe I can
sneak something in about this at some
point. Um okay,
that was the pipe. We've done the fork
and the pipe. Uh can't tell them apart
in data. We get to one now you can tell
apart in data because it behaves
differently. Um and this is the one
where many students in the past have
told me they feel betrayed by their
prior education because they were never
told about this. And this is called the
collider. I love colliders. They're
super fun. um and they arise all the
time uh just from selection processes in
data uh uh in data collection but also
endogenously when we design our models.
So in this now we reverse the arrows.
It's like a mirror image of the fork.
Now um Z is caused jointly by X and Y
and Z is called a collider at least this
this has become a very common term for
it.
So X and Y uh in this case are not
associated in the total data set because
they share no causes.
Right? If I tell you X in the
unconditioned data set, it doesn't help
you guess why. X and Y are just
independent causes of Z. Yeah. So now we
have Y independent of X, that's what
that upside down table or whatever looks
like. Yeah. At some point mathematicians
ran out of symbols and they started
making up nonsense. And so that's what
you get from these situations. I'm
sorry. It's in your fonts. Just open up
the wingy dings thing and you'll find it
find it in there somewhere. Um, uh, X
and Y both influence Z. And as a
consequence, once we stratify by Z, X
and Y become associated. And this is
something that people have no good
intuition to for because you're
psychologically healthy. Yeah. So as a
psychologically healthy person, you did
not expect this to happen. But that's
okay. I'm here as a as a psychologically
unhealthy person to help you understand
why this happens. And it's a cool effect
about information theory. Um, so again,
let's do a quick simulation.
Uh, generate the x's and y's completely
independently. These are just bernoli
variables. Generate a th00and zero and
ones uh for x and 1,000 zero ones for y
completely independent of one another.
And now I'm going to generate z using
both of them. U if x + y is greater than
zero, meaning if either is one, then
there's a 90% chance that z is one.
Otherwise, there's a 20% chance that z
is one.
Yeah, you with me so far? Um
uh now we look at the contingency table.
There's no correlation or very small
correlation in a finite sample between y
and x as as it has to be. You can just
look at the code and see that has to be
true. Yeah. uh but when we stratify now
we look at only in z equals z now um x's
and y's are strongly associated and we
look at z equals 1 x's and y's are
strongly associated they have a positive
correlation when z equals 0 and a
negative correlation when z equals 1
weird
yeah you having fun yet [laughter]
um okay let's look at the graph version
of this and then I'm going to try go
through a couple examples to give you
some intuition about why it's happening.
Um
uh so here's a case where I simulate X
and Y is continuous. Z is discrete. Same
idea. X and Y are just um Gaussian uh
random Gaussian variables. And then Z is
a Berni that is influenced by both of
them.
Uh and we plot this when Z equals 0 the
means of X and Y are lower. And when Z
equals 1, the means of X and Y are
higher. Right? because X and Y both
contribute.
If X has a big value or Y has a big
value, Z might is more likely to be one.
I'll say that again. If X is big enough
or Y is big enough where X and Y are
independent, then it's more likely for Z
to equal one. And that's what's
generating this weird conditioning
effect. Now, within um the red and the
blue points in the total data set,
sorry, in the total data set, which is
the black regression line, there's a
flat slope across all these points. You
can just see it. It's just a big cloud,
right? But if you look in the red or the
blue, they have negative slopes.
And it this arises, there's going to be
two examples. I'm going to work through
this. Uh
this arises because um
once you've learned the outcome,
remember we're conditioning on Z. So
this is like saying we learn the
outcome. We stratify by Z. Once you know
that, you know either X or Y was big
enough to generate a high value of Z if
it's one or if if it's a low value, if
it's zero, you know neither X or Y was
big enough. So you're learning things
about them jointly because uh uh Z is
produced by particular combinations of X
and Y. And so those you're learning
because you've learned what happened,
you know what the inputs were plausibly
like, right? In this case, they needed
one of them needed to be big enough. And
that's what generates the negative
correlation because only one of them
needs to be big enough, right? So if X
was big enough, then Y didn't have to be
and it will tend to be lower. If Y was
the one that was big enough, then X will
tend to be lower and so you get a
negative correlation between the X and
the Y. That's because of the causal
model I use where there's that
thresholding. Right? All right. The
collider effect can generate positive
correlations too if you have a different
thing like if they have to compete like
if only one of them or or both of them
or something like that. Yeah, you can
have have different effects. This so
there's going to be two examples. I know
it's still mysterious but it's this
finding out effect. Um uh you know in a
simple case uh often I think this is in
the book I talk about the case of if if
the lights are on in the room you know a
number of things are necessary for that
to function. There must be
a bet
and none of them are broken. That's a
collider. You do it all the time.
In data, it's hard to notice it. But in
your daily life, you make inferences
like this all the time. Intuitively, I
promise you, if you start noticing,
you'll be as sick as me. But but you do
it intuitively because you're a mammal.
Yeah, I assume birds do this, too. But,
you know, I don't like birds. I'm going
to get hate mail now. Sorry. I love
birds. Bird people. Don't send me hate
mail. Okay. Just grals. I don't like
those. All right. [laughter] I should
really stop. We have a project in my
department. I'm teasing a colleague of
mine. Okay. I love grals. I do. They're
loud, aggressive survivors.
Sorry. Only North Americans know what
grals are. They're like tiny evil crows.
[laughter]
Okay. Um, you know what I'm talking
about. I can tell.
>> Yeah, Texas has been taken over by
grals. They're just really something.
Um, okay. I should stop talking about
grals, but let me give you two quick
examples of the collider. Okay. Uh, so
here's one that arises um from
selection. It's it's the way that sort
of nature produces collider effects in
the samples you receive that the sample
has already been stratified for you and
therefore the associations in the data
set are misleading about causation. Uh
it's kind and then I'm going to show you
an example where the collider arises
because of how you structure the
statistical model. They both arise from
the same kind of effect this collider
effect. So here's one this is in the
book. Um both of these examples are in
the book. Uh so suppose we have 200
grant applications. You're all
scientists. You know what this is like.
Yeah. You you you make write a grant
application. You send it off into this
cold and personal bureaucracy. Somebody
skims it and has sure or no, right?
Something like that. Um uh there's
subjective scoring is made on multiple
things and for many granting agencies uh
reviewers are instructed to score the uh
grants post on on their newsworthiness
that is their expected impact if um if
the scientists were right about this and
the grant can be pulled off the research
can be pulled off as stated will it have
a big impact on its field that's the
newsworthiness of things right just true
that some scientific research projects
won't make any difference I think we
should still do those I study human
evolution. After all, it's hard to argue
that studying human evolution is going
to have a great impact on human welfare.
It's just a spiritual quest for me,
right, to know where humans came from.
Uh but uh I'd be emar I think it would
be quite cringe to say it's going to
raise human welfare. But other people
disagree, but that we can argue about
this later. But there's other areas of
research like say vaccines and cancer.
Yeah. where there's clear welfare
reasons to do it. And I'd be quite happy
if those things were funded at a higher
rate than human evolution. To be honest,
I'm why am I saying this? I run an
institute about human evolution. But uh
but it's true, right? This impact is a
thing and it's not silly for granting
agencies to care about it is what I'm
trying to argue. Um and then there's the
trustworthiness, the rigor of the design
and the methodology, how much
pre-planning is done, the plausibility,
their access to data sets, all of that
is also to be reviewed. And it's a
separate question from the impact,
right? Um, let's imagine that these
traits are unassoc have no association
in the population of grants that are
submitted. This is probably not true,
but let's imagine it is. Okay, this is
how I show you the selection effect. And
now what happens is if um if
newsworthiness or trustworthiness is
high enough, you can get funded. They
can compensate for one another. This is
also true in publication, right? This is
what goes wrong in nature, the journal,
right? Is that they select explicitly on
impact and so they publish some junk and
you know it in your own field. You see
it all the time, right? Those other
fields you can't tell, but it's probably
junk too, right? So disciplinary
journals, it's harder to get the junk
past reviewers. Um uh so the the you end
up with this strong negative selection
between these two features in what's
funded or what's published not because
there's an association in the
population. It isn't that proposals
which are inherently more rigorous are
um have lower impact. It's that
selection induces it because they
compensate for one another in the
judgments about what should be funded.
Yeah. If something would be big if true
it might get funded. uh even if it's a
very very risky uh methodology. Yeah,
that and that could be a rational
decision. Yeah, we're gambling uh on on
the benefits being big. Um and it's not
uh things that are boring are not
inherently rigorous, right? All that
fruitfly research. Sorry, now I'm going
to get fruitfly hate mail. I really like
fruit flies. I do. I've even p co
co-authored a fruitfly paper with
people. So there I'm immune. Ha. But um
anyway, does this make sense? Yeah, does
this make some sense? I use this example
for scientists because this is your life
and you can really relate to it and
understand what goes on. But finding a
negative correlation that among things
that are funded or published that the
most newsworthy things are the least
trustworthy, which you know again search
you think about a table of contents
you've seen recently. Um that that could
be induced largely by selection bias.
And this is a collider effect because if
it's been once it's been funded, you
know that either the newsworthiness or
the trustworthiness was high enough to
merit funding and that tells you
something about the variables and it's
hard for anything to be high on both
because that's a very very small part of
the population. So this is a selection
effect. Good. Does it make sense? Um the
code for this is in the book. You can
play around with it. Yeah. And adjust
the correlations and things. Yeah.
question
>> just to follow up and also if it was
more things in the top right corner
>> yes
>> I would also maybe suggest that there
would be a correlation in the overall
population which we know there isn't
>> so that's another reason why we
there there is nothing up there right
>> yeah we're at the frontier in this case
we're selecting only the top only the
best and in this case I'm selecting the
things with the highest joint score just
sum them up yeah if you had some other
selection criteria and you get a
different correlation and you can yeah
you can play around with that. Yeah,
absolutely. Um, this this is part of of
science reform debates, by the way, is
people argue about how you should do how
journals and and granting agencies
should do this review to avoid things
like this or even if they should, right?
The the but the from our point of view
today, the thing to avoid is concluding
this is causal, this negative
correlation, because it's not in this
example. In reality, there might be
something there, but uh it doesn't have
to be. So, you'd need another way to
study it. Um, okay. Here's the slide. I
should have advanced to forward is all
the stuff I said. All right. Sorry. Um,
so, uh, um, let me give you another, uh,
toy example of a couple other toy
examples of this, and then I'm going to
move on to an endogenous collider. I'll
explain what that means. Um, there's
this thing I assert, and I don't have
data to prove this, although I've seen a
French data set about kebab stands in
Paris, uh, that I want to get my hands
on, but, uh, that restaurants, um, in
some many often many of the best
restaurants in European cities are in
terrible locations.
Yeah. And then the stuff that's on like
the tourist strip in the center of town
is is stuff like vapanos. Now, I'm going
to get vapiano hate mail, but it's
terrible. My god, it's like it's like a
a declaration of war against Italy.
Papanos, right? Sorry if any about you
like it, but
I'm exaggerating a bit. It's not that
bad, but it's bad, [laughter] right? But
no, you know, so there's a negative
correlation between the quality of the
location and the quality of the food.
How could that arise? Now, I don't know,
but I've speculated for years about this
that it's because the only way to
survive in a bad location is to be
excellent. And so, the only restaurants
you're going to find in a city in bad
locations are ones that are good.
Because if they were bad, they would
have gone out of business already.
Meanwhile, if you're on the tourist
strip, you get a lot of foot traffic.
You don't have to be that good. Yeah.
And that'll generate a That's all you
need to generate a negative correlation.
And again, I haven't proved this, but um
um I've I've I've recently gotten my
hands on a large data set about Paris
kebab stands and distance from uh from
transit stops. And I'm I'm looking
forward to putting that in the next
edition of my book as an example. Um
uh and then there's classic think about
actors can succeed by being skilled or
being attractive. And so often the best
actors are less attractive. Anybody ever
noticed this? [laughter]
I'm not going to name any names now. I
know I've gone too far today already
with the Grale stuff. Uh not going to
get in trouble. Okay, that's that's
selection that doesn't happen because
you put a variable in the data set, but
it's the same mechanism as a collider.
And you can do this to yourself rather
than nature doing the selecting.
um uh you can do it by conditioning on
the collider variable. Uh so we call
this endogenous selection. You condition
or stratify by a collider and that
creates uh this I call phantom
non-causal associations like the
negative correlation in the previous
slide. So I have this extended example
in the book. I'm going to move through
this example quickly. I apologize but
it's in the book completely including
the code to replicate it. Uh and this is
driven by a realworld piece of research
I learned about from my colleague Yuy
Roar who's at the University of Liipc
here. Does age influence happiness? Uh
which does sound like something with
impact and importance, right? Knowing
about trends in happiness with age. Um
so here's the idea. The est demand is
the influence of age on happiness. Do
people get uh less happy as they age? Do
they get more happy as they age? The
concern is that they get less happy as
they age. Uh that's why this literature
exists. I understand it. Um and and it
makes sense that there are lots of
possible compounds. You can't do
experiments on these things. You can't
assign people to age. [laughter] You
can't assign people to be uh to get
married. You can't assign people to be
poor, right? You can't do experimental
research in these in these areas. But
there's still important questions. So
there are a bunch of confounds like
marital status which also might affect
happiness. um uh which it you might want
to put into a regression that uh models
the distribution of happiness with age.
Uh I want you to imagine as a uh just as
a thought experiment that what's really
going on here is that happiness and age
both jointly determine marriage. Happy
people are more likely to get married.
Um and older people are more likely to
get married. And you're saying why? It's
just years of exposure. Epidemiologists
understand this, right? The longer
you're alive, the more chance you have
to get married, the more chance you have
to die, too. But lots of things, but
let's focus on the good outcomes, right?
You could longer you more likely to win
the lottery the more years you play it.
It's the same kind of effect. And so age
and some life event are going to be uh
positively associated in real
populations. In this uh in this DAG on
this slide, uh age has no effect on
happiness at all. Now, I'm not claiming
this is reality, but I'm I'm creating a
stark example to show you the risks of
just blindly throwing in control
variables when there are potentially
colliders. Um, so here's an example
I used to produce a data set from this
DAG. And what's happening here is each
row um is just a bunch of individuals
with h a certain happiness level. We
assign happiness at birth and it never
changes in this simulation.
I know it's kind of factual and it's
weird, but it's it's to show you the
power of the collider for creating
strong associations. So each little
point is a person and everybody's born
unmarried,
right? So they're they're not red. You
agree with that assumption? Yeah. Okay.
So some things we know as biologists.
Yeah. So um and then after age 18 I
think in this in this uh simulation
there's a chance every year that the
individual gets married and that chance
is associated with their happiness. So
age and happiness are both causing
jointly marital status because the
longer you live past 18 the greater the
chance that you flipped to being
married. Yeah. Although some individuals
never do. you see just pass off the edge
on the right uh into a retirement
colony. That's what happens at 65 in
Europe, [laughter] right? And um but at
the bottom where individuals are less
happy, there are more individuals who
are never happy at the end of never
married at the end of life. You see it?
Okay. Satisfying. All right. So, I spent
half an hour making this animation. I
hope it's satisfying. All right. A life
well spent. Um now what I want you to
see do you know causally that um that
age uh and happiness are not um uh
rather that happiness is fixed at birth
in this causal model. We've rigged it.
Um but if you just ran regression strat
if you stratify by marital status um age
and happiness are negatively associated
within each both subopuls. Within the
married subopul the red points you can
draw a regression line with your
eyeballs. You see it's negatively
associated. Yeah. The less happy
individuals,
the less happy ones are less likely are
are older.
Yeah. Um and also in unmarried
individuals, the same thing. Yeah. But
in the total population, there's no
association between age and happiness
because happiness is fixed at birth and
no one dies.
Yeah. They just retire.
[snorts]
Okay. Is this cool? Does that make
sense? All right. Uh All right. That's
the collider. It's my favorite. Um
there's also the descendant. I'm going
to go through this quickly. The
descendant is a proxy for any of the
other things. And so the way the
descendant functions just depends upon
what it's attached to. So descendant is
this uh little A that's coming off of Z.
It could also come off of X or Y, right?
But we're focusing off of Z because that
was the pivot point for the other
examples. Um if we condition on A, it's
as if conditioning on Z but weaker.
[snorts] It depends upon the association
between A and Z, right? How strongly Z
causes A.
Uh so this is you might call this a
proxy measurement. These things are
present everywhere. Um X and Y are
causally associated uh through Z. In
this example, A holds information about
Z. So when we stratify by A, um, X and Y
are less associated than originally.
They may not be completely blocked,
right? Because A doesn't have all the
information about Z. Uh, that's what a
descendant is. Does this make some
sense? You can put a descendant on a
collider too and then it acts like a
collider, but like a soft collider.
[snorts]
Yeah. Uh, now if you think about it,
this sort of thing is really common
because there are many important
research questions where we cannot
measure the thing we want to. So we
measure something associated with it and
then we put it in a regression and act
as if it was that thing. This is what
you're doing in those cases. You're
regressing on a descendant. And
sometimes it's really important to think
through the logic of that. Um it's not
only hazards like that, but if you get
enough descendants, you can reconstruct
the thing you can't measure. I think
psychologist personality psychologists
do this all the time, right? Because the
thing you want to measure in fact does
not exist. It's called personality.
I don't know if we have a personality
psychologist in the audience. I don't
mean that as a hostile comment, right?
Uh it's just that factor analytic
models, the factors don't have to exist.
They're just measurement constructs.
They're ways to use multiple proxies and
measurements to get at something that
that cannot be measured. I think that's
a legitimate form of research. We do it
all the time. Knowledge as a teacher is
like this, right? When I give you a test
and make you answer a bunch of different
questions, I'm trying to get it to
knowledge, which is a thing I can't
measure directly, but I have proxies for
it. And if I have enough of those
proxies, that is enough questions, I can
reconstruct it with relative security.
Does that make sense? So, it's not a bad
thing, but it's we want to really put
that kind of measurement model into
causal graphs. Descendants are the way
to go. Okay. Um, all right. Now, we're
ready in in the uh was that a question?
No, that was a stretch. Sorry.
[laughter] Um, when you when you teach,
you know how this is, right? Every like
stretch becomes like, is that a
question? Uh, pay attention to me. No.
Um so we're going to learn the uh rules
of d you've just learned the rules of
deparation to remind [clears throat] you
what the d is that means directional
these are directed graphs uh directed
graphs uh when we condition on certain
nodes in the graph it creates
independencies
um or associations between other nodes
and the rules of desparation are all you
need to figure that out and there's
really just three I'm leaving off the
descendant but the descendant again
mimics these right just a soft version
of these. There's the fork, the pipe,
and the collider. In the fork and the
pipe, in both cases, X and Y are
associated before stratifying, but once
we stratify by the middle variable, the
association goes away.
Um, and in the collider, it's the
reverse. X and Y are not associated
until you stratify by the middle
variable. Okay, so these three rules are
all you need in complicated graphs to
figure out how to design your
regression. And I'm going to walk you
through some examples now. Are you
ready? Yeah. It's worth the work. Trust
me. Um the thing we're going to justify
is often called the backdoor criterion.
Uh and it's it's just a a workflow for
applying the rules of desparation. Um
but what's nice about it is you can do
it with your eyeballs. It's simple
enough with a little bit of practice.
You just look at a causal graph and you
can do the backdoor criterion. Trust me,
it's going to be hard at first, but then
you get used to it. Um it's like
learning to read a new alphabet. I know
many of you have done that in your lives
like learn to read cerillic or Greek or
something. Yeah. And like the first day
it's crazy and then second day you're
like this is why was this hard? Uh
that's kind of what No, people are
refusing my example. [laughter] But um
yeah. No, I mean Greek and cerillic are
easy. You just need a day. I mean
they're just alphabets, right? It's just
it's nothing. Um
uh kanji on the other hand, you need a
lifetime, right? But let's not go there.
Kanti is not an alphabet. Uh rules of
desparation. So the backd dooror
criterion, the goal of it is to tell us
if there are some set of variables
called the adjustment set that we can
condition on in our regression model in
order to um non-experimentally without
randomization on on the treatment X uh
statistically imitate a random
experiment. Wouldn't that be great? Uh
and sometimes it's possible. Yeah. like
if you've measured all the confounds.
But the rules of desparation tell us why
stratifying on confounds works. And so
that's also what I'm going to finally
reveal to you is why does stratifying by
the confound actually remove
confounding. Right? It's not just free.
It's not obvious. I don't think I think
we have to explain it. So I'm going to
explain it now. Um so let's look at this
graph right here. This is a simple
confound case, but we've got this
variable Z between the unmeasured
confound and X.
So here's how you here's how you use the
back door criterion. Um first thing you
do is you identify all the paths. I'm
going to I'll show you what the paths
are. Uh but they're ways of moving
between nodes. That's what a path is
that connects the treatment X. We want
to learn about the effect of the
treatment on the outcome Y. Uh so we
find all the paths connecting X and Y
through the graph. And usually there
will be more than one. U here there are
two. Yeah, you can probably see them,
but I'll draw them out for you in a
moment. There are two paths here that
connect X and Y. Some of those paths are
causal and some of them aren't. And our
job is to use the rules of desparation
to block all the non-causal associations
through the non-causal paths. And you
you can do that because the rules of
desparation tell you how to make things
independent along a particular path. So
along non-causal paths we want to block
that association and we want to not
block the association along causal paths
so that the only association that
remains in the statistical model between
X and Y are the causal associations.
Easy, right? I I'll show you some
examples. Um so pass with arrows
entering X are called backdoor pass. So
arrows leaving X are front doors. I
didn't make up this language. This this
is I just have to teach you what people
say in the literature. I'm sorry, but
that's if an arrow is leaving X, it's
called a front door. That's a causal
path, right? Because if you intervene on
X, the changes happen out the front
door. Those are the causal paths. Yeah.
When you intervene on X, nothing happens
to the arrows entering it, right? The
variables upstream from it uh uh through
the back doors aren't going to change
because you changed X, right? Um which
is why they're called non-causal paths.
They're called box or backdoor paths
here. And um what we want to do is find
some adjustment set. It's called a set
of variables we can stratify by that
close or block all the back door paths.
So this is the simplest example uh I can
think of. Um here are the two paths that
connect X and Y. There's on the left we
have the front door path from X to Y and
on the right we have the one backdoor
path. Remember to find back door paths.
You look at X and you find arrows into
it. Every one of those could be a
backdoor path. Yeah. Do you see this?
You with me so far? There's just two
paths. Okay. And the one on the right is
a back door. So that's the one we want
to be concerned with. We don't want to
It's also important that you don't close
the front door path, but that's a lower
risk, right? It does happen though, and
I'm going to talk about a case. People
do this uh in experiments by regressing
on post- treatment variables. But um uh
that's a lower risk. Uh so this is a
backdoor path. How do we close it? Well,
there's a uh there's a pipe from U to Z
to X. And you know how to close a pipe.
You condition on Z, right? You and X are
associated. Therefore, X is conf uh the
association between X and Y is
confounded by this backdoor path. But we
can block that non-causal association by
stratifying by Z because everything that
X knows about you, Z knows.
So once we've measured Z and stratified
by it, we've blocked the association
between X and Y through this path.
Question. Yeah.
>> Is it the same as when we use random
effects?
>> Um, it's not the same, but random
effects can well fixed effects and
certain kinds of random effects also
account for confounding. Yeah. But it's
not exactly the same thing. There's a
lecture a whole lecture in the other
section I did which connects random
effects to this. Um I forget the number
but I could find it. It's on the website
already. It's it's uh the title of the
lecture is group level confounding.
Um if you're worried about individual
level confounding, there's also group
level confounding. And so the other the
other course, yeah, the other section
where we do random effects. It's just 10
weeks of random effects in the other
section, just constant random effects.
And anyway, there's a whole lecture
about group level confounding and how
how unmeasured group level confounds are
related to random effects estimation.
Yeah, if you're interested in it, I put
a ton of work into that lecture. It was
exhausting, but I'm very proud of it.
[snorts] It's a great Yeah. Um, okay.
Uh, where was I? Yes. So, look, uh,
simulation experiments. I highly
encourage you to do simulation
experiments when you're learning this
material. So, I'm going to show you a
few and you can modify this code.
Simulation experiments are not just for
people who can't do math, okay? They do
a lot more than that. I can do the math,
but I still do the simulation
experiments because you can do many more
rapid experiments and play with it and
create graphs and illustrations and do
communication. Uh, it's just a very nice
way to prototype arguments and work
through things. Um, so here we're going
to simulate from this DAG. I make up
some
uh some path coefficients. I'm going to
say that the true effect of X on Y is
zero. That's what BXY is. And then I um
I make the unobserved confound have a a
negative uh impact on Y and Z. And then
Z has a positive impact on X. So we get
confounding here uh naturally. And if we
uh uh run two regression models um on
the simulated data. The first ignoring U
and Z, it's just regresses Y on X. um
that estimate is confounded and that's
the uh black posterior distribution at
the bottom. The true effect here is
zero, right? And so it's biased. It
would be biased in an infinite sample,
right? This is not small sample bias.
Um once we stratify by Z, uh then the
posterior distribution is centered on
the true value. Yeah. And as we get
infinite data, it'll converge right to
the true value. So this kind of proof to
you that you get the idea. Yeah, of how
it works. And you can play around with
this and change the true effect uh so
it's non zero and see that the red
posterior distribution follows it. I
encourage you to do that. Yeah, ensure
yourself that I'm not telling you lies.
Statistics works sometimes. Um these
kinds of experiments by the way uh also
are good for teaching you that there is
no strategy that will work sometimes
because there are research situations
where in an observational setting you
just can't get an unbiased causal
effect. And the simulations can teach
you that too. That's an important thing
is when you have a a a simulation
workflow that won't always give you
happy answers, right? Because the
universe is disappointing. No. Uh last
here's where the table two fallacy comes
back. Um there's when we do the
correctly specified model which includes
Z, we get a coefficient for Z and its
value is positive. It's 0.24 24 with a
standard deviation of of about 0.1. So
all the probability mass is positive.
You might be in uh tempted to conclude
that Z has a positive effect on Y. But
that is not true because you know the
DAG. Z has no effect on Y.
What does that coefficient mean?
It means nothing. [laughter] No, it
means something. It's a non-causal
association. It's confounded. Uh Z is
confounded. The relationship between Z
and Y is confounded by U, right?
Yeah. And you have it. Just because you
fixed the confounding on X doesn't mean
you fixed it on Z.
In fact, if you fixed it on Z, you
wouldn't fix it on X
because you would be blocking uh the
path, right? Well, no, actually you
could block them on both if we had
something measured like you. Yeah, but
we don't. This happens a lot. the adjust
the coefficients on the adjustment
variables are not there to estimate uh
effects of those variables. They're
they're just bits of the machine that
are there to give you a valid causal
estimate on one variable on X. Yeah. So
it's a fallacy to interpret all the
coefficients as causal effects. The the
but the the coefficients always have an
interpretation given a DAG or some other
causal model. It doesn't have to be a
DAG. Could be a set of ordinary
differential equations. uh but the
interpretation will not always be causal
because it's just there to to remove
structural confounding. Does that make
some sense? Um
uh okay, I've got about 15 minutes here.
I want to run through a more elaborate
example and show you the power of
desparation that you have acquired that
you can do fancier graphs. Okay. Um and
uh what we're going to do is take this
DAG again. We're going to focus on the
causal uh influence of X on Y. And you
see that there's one causal path there.
Well, I shouldn't say you see, we'll
draw it out. I'm going to go step by
step here. Um the question is which
variables do we need to stratify by to
close the non-causal pass? Um and so
this is a fairly complicated uh DAG
where there's a cascade of associations
that roll through the whole thing. And
so by the time uh X is influencing Y,
it's been contaminated by a bunch of
backdoor pass. I don't know if this
animation helps you at all. It's like a
weird beach ball thing that I wrote. But
uh again, I spent half an hour on this,
so you're going to watch it. [laughter]
But uh the point is you see that X is
picking up the properties of A and C and
Z. And then by the time all of that
reaches Y, Y has has got information
associations from all of these different
paths. And our job using the rules of
deparation is to block the components of
that association that are non-causal.
And we can do this um using the rules of
deparation.
So uh now again if we could uh what
we're going to try to do is
statistically imitate a random
experiment. So if we had a random
experiment, it would just mean deleting
all the back doors because when you do a
random experiment, you determine X,
nothing else. You are God. in the
experiment if you do it right. Sometimes
randomization is hard but if you can you
can successfully randomize then all of
the backdoor paths are literally removed
from the DAG. Our job is to do that
statistically using the rules of
deparation to block those backdoor
associations so that all that is left is
the front door association between X and
Y. That's how the statistical adjustment
for confounding works. Does that make
some sense just verbally? Now we're
going to find every path between X and Y
and there are a good number of them.
Now, that's why I chose this example.
Here they are. [snorts] We've got paths.
Um, the first path, we'll start I'm
going to start in the upper left and I'm
going to go through each of these. Okay,
these are all paths that connect X and
Y. So, the first one is the causal path
and it's open and we want to leave it
there because this is what we want to
remain. We want to block everything
else. Yeah. Um,
the second one is this one along the
bottom. It's a backdoor path because
there's an arrow entering X at its
start. Yeah, information flows against
arrows. That's no problem, right? That's
that's that's the basic problem of
statistics is that associations flow
against causation, but we only want
causal stuff usually. Uh we want to
close this and it's a fork and you know
how to close a fork, right? You
condition on this middle variable. So,
we're going to stratify on C.
Yeah, if you've measured it, you're in
good shape. If you haven't measured it,
you complain a lot. Yeah. Or you go try
to measure it. You you make a design to
measure it. Um so we're going to
stratify by C. There we've got another
um uh path here.
Uh this is also a backdoor path and it's
also a fork, right? It's just a mirror
image of the C problem. So we're going
to stratify by Z.
Yeah. So that's another one.
Um, now we have this one. This is also a
backdoor path. It goes to A to Z to B to
Y. Um, and we, this was closed because Z
is a collider and information doesn't
flow through a collider. But now it's
open because we stratified by Z in the
previous path. We have to stratify by Z
to close that other path. And that opens
this one, which means we need to
stratify by A or B in addition in order
to block this path. I'm going to say all
this again because this is this is
mystifying. Sometimes to close one path,
you end up opening another. And that's
what happens here. We've got to close
the path from X to Z to Y, which means
we must stratify by Z. But when we do
that, we open the path X to A to Z to B
to Y, which was closed because there was
a collider in the middle of it. And
associations don't flow through
colliders until you stratify by them. So
now we need to block this path another
way. And this path has two forks. Uh,
and we can condition on either to block
the whole path. A or B or both.
Yeah, but A or B. Um, I would choose B
for reasons I can explain to you another
time, but uh uh but either will work.
Um, and then we've got a couple of more
paths just to go quickly. Um, this is
another backdoor path. Uh, uh, we need
to condition on A to close that. um
uh or Z, but we've conditioned on Z, so
it's closed, right? We've already
decided we're going to condition on Z.
And the same uh with the other one.
We've already decided to condition on Z.
So, we get our minimal adjustment set.
It includes C and Z for sure. And then
either A or B.
That would be minimal. Yeah. Question.
>> I don't see why A or B
>> because you don't need both. Either one
would block the path over the top. Yeah,
either one is sufficient.
Yeah, either one will block the
association between X and Y through that
path.
If you do A, it stops early. If you do
B, it stops late, but it stops either
way.
Yeah, it blocks the whole path, right?
Because the the association between uh
so the X to A to Z part is a subpath.
So, and then you have another subpath Z
to B to Y. Those are both forks. you
close either one then then Y and Z cease
to be associated right or or rather Y
will still be associated with Z if you
choose A but then Z won't be associated
with X so you can stop it on either side
and then the association doesn't pass
through yeah questionif
A goes to Z and B goes to Z and like
That was the question also about why
>> I mean they don't seem to create another
path after that.
>> But the thing is that Z is a collider on
the path over the top the the so the the
top left path on this uh diagram that
includes A and B. Z is a collider there.
So once you've stratified on it, you
close the fork that contains Z by
stratifying on it. But that opens the
collider path.
So information in the absence of
conditioning on Z, you've got a
confound. Z is a confound of X and Y, a
common cause. So if you don't stratify
by it, then the association between X
and Y is confounded by that fork that
contains Z at its middle. So you
stratify by Z. You've closed the fork.
That part of the of the non-causal
association is gone. But now you've
opened another one that wasn't active
before. Right? Sometimes the world is
like this. Well, because I drew the
example, but but it could be true. So
now um uh Z is a collider of A and B. So
once you stratify by Z, A and B are
associated.
And A influences X and B influences Y.
So once A and B are associated, you've
created a confound.
And so I know. So now you need you must
stratify by Z and you must ratify by
either A and B or both. But one will do.
Yeah. because it'll block the
association. Does that help? I chose
this example because it's puzzling. So,
if you're feeling puzzled, I've
succeeded. It's not cruelty. It's to
engage your mind in uh something that
really tests your understanding of how
this stuff works.
>> Like the idea then that you don't care
that Affects X by itself is because
everything that A is, you know, you
know.
>> Exact. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So
it's I mean another way I should say
this is that the rules of desparation
are simple but all of these things
interact once they're placed in the
structural model together and so you get
these kind of emergent properties which
you didn't think of in the beginning
like closing one path opens another uh
because the node appears in multiple
paths Z appears in two paths actually it
appears in four pass but yeah
>> what do we call the thing at the end of
the pipe like a zy what do we call
Um
>> like a hack
>> at the start of the pipe. I don't know.
The start of the pipe. [laughter] That's
a great question. You can call it
>> It would be really funny if that wasn't
taken.
>> Yeah, it would. I don't know. Yeah, the
question was what do we call the thing
at the start of a pipe? I don't know if
there's particular terminology for that.
The the the um Yeah, I don't know. The
thing at the end is the faucet
obviously, right? [laughter]
Of the pipe. But
>> Oh,
>> yeah. You were thinking of I think it
might be like the bucket.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. It could be a bucket.
I think it's a faucet. You turn it on at
the end. Yeah. Yeah. Why is the faucet?
>> A could be like tank.
>> Yeah. A is the tank. There we go. We've
solved the whole problem.
>> So, we're problem solvers here in this
class. We could anyway uh this this
terminology is not completely
standardized and I've chosen this um
because uh I think it's the most common
I come across. uh but if you look at the
old lit from the 80s when this formal
literature really got established and
all the proofs were done right this is a
this is a whole you can define algebraic
systems from these structural models and
analyze them and that's where the proofs
of this stuff come from um the collider
is a much more recent term they didn't
use the word collider back then yeah I
mean these are papers where you just get
a page of math notation right so you
don't have to call anything anything but
uh it's not safe for human consumption
that literature um are we good for this
yeah did this help a little it. Um, when
you're starting out with these things,
it's natural to feel concerned that
you're catching all the pass and you're
doing it right. Luckily, computers are
really good at doing this. Uh, so
there's a nice website, there's an R
package, uh, which will do this as well,
multiple R packages. You can give it
DAGs and ask it to give you adjustment
sets for specific estimates. But there's
this nice website where you just click
and draw called dagedy.net. And when
you're starting out, I highly recommend
this website. It's good. Um, it'll show
you the adjustment sets. You can choose
S demands once you get used to the the
sort of furious clicking it requires.
Um, it's it's it's fine. Yeah. Uh, so so
play around with that um and get a sense
of it. Okay. Let me try to summarize a
bit about the back door criterion. The
backd dooror criterion is one thing we
can do with the rules of deparation, but
there's more stuff. So I I'm not going
to teach you that stuff today, but I
just want to get get into your mind that
this isn't all we do with structural
causal models. It's just the first thing
you try that there are other things.
Sometimes there will be no adjustment
set that will close all non-causal paths
and that doesn't mean you're doomed. Uh
there's more you can do. um uh the like
the basian clan that I'm a member of uh
has this tradition of doing causal
inference using the full structural
causal model uh and often it has
multiple equations in it. It expresses
all the confounds and everything as a
probabilistic model as a joint
posterior. Um that's completely
compatible with this do calculus stuff.
It's uh the math behind it is all the
same. Um, but you can then choose things
like monotonicity or positivity
constraints or other things which make
identification possible. And that's a
that's a a long-standing tradition as
well. And um uh it's compatible with the
idea too uh that do calculus the rules
of do calculus in general allow you to
identify which variables uh you need to
construct an estimate and how to use
them. uh and sometimes it's not a single
equation is the solution. Sometimes you
get multi-equation estimators that you
have to use. Simultaneous equation
systems or or multiple stage estimators
are common in these things. So some of
you may know about things called
instrumental variables for the
population geneticist. This is mandelian
randomization. If you've heard of that,
that's it's a thing that statistitians
call instrumental variables. Um and
that's a that's a multiple equation
statistical estimator. There's there's
no single adjustment set that works
there. you need to estimate things with
multiple equations. Um, but there's lots
of solutions like that that go beyond
the back door criterion. That's the only
thing I want you to take away from this
right now. This is not everything. So,
if you're in a in a situation where
there's there's no adjustment set that's
going to work, um, uh, your job is not
to give up. It is to see which
assumptions would be necessary going
beyond that because remember, DAGs make
no assumptions about functional forms or
or strengths of relationships or
interactions or any of those things. as
you impose strong scientifically
justifiable assumptions on top of that,
you can often identify things. Yeah. And
that's totally legitimate. Um you may
say that the backdoor criterion is the
worst case scenario, right? If you
assuming nothing, is there an adjustment
set? And sometimes there is and that's
great, but sometimes you need more.
Okay, I have run out of time. Um and
I've gotten where I wanted to go. Uh
good and bad controls. There are lots of
good controls and your job is to
identify them. How do you identify them?
Start with the back door criterion. Uh
there are also bad controls. Back door
criterion can help you there too. Um
thank you for your attention. When we
come in next time, we're going to
continue with some applied examples of
using these things. Uh and we'll build
up to some scientifically interesting
inferences, I hope.